CSE2252 DATA COMMUNICATION AND COMPUTER NETWORK LAB
5 STORED EXPERIMENTS — EXPERIMENT 2 SKIPPED

EXPERIMENT 1
Study of Basic Network Commands and Network Devices

AIM:
To study basic network commands and identify common network devices, reference models, transmission media and connectors used in computer networks.

A. BASIC NETWORK COMMANDS

1. PING
Purpose: Ping checks whether a destination device or host is reachable over the network. It sends ICMP Echo Request packets and waits for Echo Reply packets. It can be used to check connectivity with computers, routers, switches or an Internet host.
Steps:
1. Open Command Prompt.
2. Type: ping www.google.com
3. Press Enter and observe the replies.
4. For continuous testing, use: ping www.google.com -t
5. Stop continuous ping using Ctrl + C.

2. IPCONFIG
Purpose: Ipconfig displays the network adapter configuration of the computer. It can show the IP address, subnet mask and default gateway. The /all option provides additional details such as DNS information and MAC address.
Steps:
1. Open Command Prompt.
2. Type: ipconfig
3. Press Enter.
4. For detailed information, type: ipconfig /all.

3. RELEASE AND RENEW IP
Purpose: These commands are used to refresh the IP address assigned to a network adapter. Release removes the current IP address, while renew requests a new IP address from the network.
Steps:
1. Type: ipconfig /release
2. Press Enter.
3. Type: ipconfig /renew
4. Press Enter.

4. TRACERT
Purpose: Tracert shows the path taken by packets from the computer to a destination. It lists the routers through which the packets pass before reaching the destination.
Steps:
1. Open Command Prompt.
2. Type: tracert google.com
3. Press Enter and observe the route.

5. NSLOOKUP
Purpose: Nslookup is used to query DNS information. It displays the default DNS server and can be used to check how a domain name is resolved to an IP address.
Steps:
1. Type: nslookup
2. Press Enter.
3. Observe the DNS server information.

6. NETSTAT
Purpose: Netstat displays active network connections and listening ports. It helps identify TCP/UDP connections and the network services currently using ports.
Steps:
1. Type: netstat
2. Type: netstat -a
3. Press Enter and observe the connections.

7. ARP
Purpose: ARP stands for Address Resolution Protocol. It maps IP addresses to MAC addresses so that devices can communicate over the local network. The arp -a command displays the current ARP cache.
Steps:
1. Type: arp -a
2. Press Enter.
3. Observe the ARP cache.

8. NBTSTAT
Purpose: Nbtstat displays NetBIOS information used by Windows network devices. The -n option shows the NetBIOS names currently registered by the device.
Steps:
1. Type: nbtstat -n
2. Press Enter.
3. Observe the NetBIOS names.

9. ROUTE
Purpose: The route command displays the computer's routing table. The routing table contains information used to decide where network packets should be forwarded.
Steps:
1. Type: route
2. Press Enter.
3. Observe the routing information.

10. GETMAC
Purpose: Getmac displays the Media Access Control address of the network adapters installed in the computer. The MAC address is a hardware address used for communication on the local network.
Steps:
1. Type: getmac
2. Press Enter.
3. Note the MAC address.

11. SYSTEMINFO
Purpose: Systeminfo displays detailed information about the computer and operating system, including Windows version and system hardware information.
Steps:
1. Type: systeminfo
2. Press Enter.
3. Observe the displayed system details.

B. NETWORK DEVICES

1. Identify router, switch, hub, bridge, repeater, gateway, modem, wireless access point and NIC.
2. Note the main function of each device.
3. Identify OSI and TCP/IP reference models.
4. Identify UTP, STP, coaxial and fiber-optic cables.
5. Identify the RJ45 connector.

RESULT:
The basic network commands, networking devices, reference models, transmission media and connector were studied.

EXPERIMENT 2
Basic Configuration of Switch/Router Using Cisco Packet Tracer

AIM:
To configure a basic router and switch in Cisco Packet Tracer and verify network connectivity.

A. ROUTER CONFIGURATION

1. Open Cisco Packet Tracer.
2. Construct the required topology.
3. Assign IP addresses to all PCs.
4. Use another network address for the second network.
5. Assign the gateway address to the first router interface.
6. Turn ON the interface/port status.
7. Assign the gateway address of the second network to FastEthernet 0/1.
8. Check connectivity from a PC:
   Desktop > Command Prompt
9. Execute the ping command for the other network.
10. Send a Simple PDU between PCs.
11. Check that the PDU Last Status is Successful.
12. Open Simulation Mode.
13. Select only ICMP in the event filters.
14. Use Capture/Forward to observe the ICMP packet movement.
15. Confirm that the PDU is successful.
16. Save the topology using the .pkt file format.

B. SWITCH CONFIGURATION

1. Enter privileged mode:
   enable
2. Enter configuration mode:
   configure terminal
3. Erase the startup configuration:
   erase startup-config
4. Reload the switch:
   reload
5. Check flash memory:
   show flash
6. Display IOS/version information:
   show version
7. Display the current clock:
   show clock
8. Configure the clock:
   clock set hh:mm:ss MONTH DAY YEAR
9. Change the switch name:
   hostname S1
10. Configure an MOTD banner.
11. Save the running configuration:
   copy running-config startup-config
12. Display the current configuration:
   show running-config
13. Check interface status:
   show ip interface brief
14. Display VLAN information:
   show vlan

RESULT:
The basic router and switch configuration was completed and connectivity was verified using ping and Simple PDU.

EXPERIMENT 3
Configure Privilege Level Password and User Authentication in Switch

AIM:
To configure console security, privilege-level passwords and local user authentication on a switch.

A. HOSTNAME AND CONSOLE PASSWORD

1. Enter configuration mode.
2. Set the hostname:
   hostname CISCO
3. Enter the console line:
   line console 0
4. Set the console password:
   password cisco123
5. Enable login:
   login
6. Exit the configuration mode.
7. Verify the console password by reconnecting to the console.

B. PRIVILEGE LEVEL PASSWORD

1. Enter configuration mode.
2. Set a normal privilege password:
   enable password muscat
3. Set an encrypted privilege password:
   enable secret nizwa
4. Exit configuration mode.
5. Enter enable mode and verify the password.

C. USER AUTHENTICATION

1. Enter configuration mode:
   conf t
2. Select the console line:
   line console 0
3. Enable local login:
   login local
4. Create a local user:
   username network password pwd
5. Exit configuration mode.
6. Exit the configuration mode.
7. Log in using the configured username and password.
8. Enter enable mode and provide the configured privilege password.
9. Verify that authentication is working correctly.
10. Confirm that the switch accepts the configured local user credentials.

RESULT:
The switch hostname, console password, privilege-level password and local user authentication were configured and verified.

EXPERIMENT 4
Configure DHCP Server and Wireless Router and Check Connectivity

AIM:
To configure a DHCP server and wireless router, connect wireless devices and verify DHCP addressing and connectivity.

STEPS:

1. Configure the DHCP server.
2. Configure FastEthernet on the server.
3. Configure the wireless router.
4. On the laptop, remove the wired NIC card.
5. Select/add the wireless card.
6. Connect the laptop to the wireless network.
7. Connect the laptop with the wireless router.
8. Enter the wireless security key.
9. On the PC, remove the wired NIC card.
10. Select/add the wireless card.
11. Repeat the wireless connection steps.
12. Check the DHCP IP address assigned to the PC.
13. Check the DHCP IP address assigned to the laptop.
14. Verify that both devices received addresses from the DHCP server.
15. Check the wireless connection status.
16. Test connectivity between the connected devices.
17. Confirm that the devices can communicate through the wireless router.

RESULT:
The DHCP server and wireless router were configured. The PC and laptop received DHCP IP addresses and network connectivity was checked.

EXPERIMENT 5
Configure Static Routing Using Cisco Packet Tracer

AIM:
To configure static routing between two networks using Cisco Packet Tracer and verify connectivity.

STEPS:

1. Open Cisco Packet Tracer.
2. Draw the required topology.
3. Assign IP addresses to all PCs.
4. Configure the IP address of Router 1 FastEthernet 0/0.
5. Configure the IP address of Router 1 FastEthernet 0/1.
6. Configure the IP address of Router 2 FastEthernet 0/0.
7. Configure the IP address of Router 2 FastEthernet 0/1.

8. Configure static routing on Router 1:
   Router(config)# ip route 192.168.2.0 255.255.255.0 192.168.3.2

9. Configure static routing on Router 2:
   Router(config)# ip route 192.168.1.0 255.255.255.0 192.168.3.1

10. The static route can also be added through the Config window by selecting Static.
11. Add the opposite network address, subnet mask and next-hop address.
12. Verify that the static routes are present in the router configuration.
13. From a PC, open:
    Desktop > Command Prompt
14. Test connectivity using:
    ping 192.168.2.1
15. Observe the ping replies.
16. Check the number of packets sent, received and lost.
17. Confirm that packets are received and packet loss is 0%.
18. Verify that the two networks can communicate through the routers.

RESULT:
Static routes were configured on both routers and connectivity between the two networks was verified using the ping command.

NOTE:
The original lab manual's Experiment 2 has been skipped. The remaining five experiments are renumbered continuously from 1 to 5 for easier study and storage.
